Applied Research

Light’s “Technical Writing and Professional
Status”: Fifty Years Later
Patricia A. Hallier and Edward A. Malone

Abstract

Purpose: To present a significant historical document in the decades-long movement
to professionalize technical communication
Method: Historical analysis and textual editing
Results: Light’s 1961 article applied then-current definitions of a profession to
technical writing and suggested that technical writers could become professionals only
through formal education and training.
Conclusions: On the 50th anniversary of its publication, Light’s article illustrates the
tenor of discussions about professionalization in the early years of our profession and
invites comparison with current professionalization discussions.
Keywords: technical communication, history, professionalization, technical
communication education

Practitioner’s
Takeaway

• This article provides an introduction
to — as well as an edition of —
Light’s “Techncial Writing and
Professional Status” (1961).
• It makes an important historical text
more accessible and usable.

The practice of technical communication has been
undergoing professionalization since at least the 1940s.
The men and women who created our first professional
organizations and academic programs in the 1950s were
trying to advance a profession that had begun to emerge
during World War II and in the postwar years. Thus, for
more than 60 years, we have been struggling to achieve
mature professional status. Among the many attributes
of a mature profession is a strong historical identity
(Savage, 2003). By studying the earliest discussions of
professionalization in technical communication, we can
further develop the historical identity of our profession.
This year marks the 50th anniversary of an essay titled
“Technical Writing and Professional Status,” published
in the American Chemical Society’s Journal of Chemical
Documentation (JCD). The author was Israel Light (see
Figure 1), a practitioner and member of the Society

• It contributes to a historical
perspective of professionalization in
technical communication.

of Technical Writers and Publishers (STWP), STC’s
precursor. Published in 1961, Light’s essay was one
of the more scholarly considerations of the topic at
the time.

Figure 1: Israel Light, c. 1964.
Reprinted from STWP Review.

Like today, the 1960s were a period of evolution
for the field. The self-described first generation of
Volume 58, Number 4, November 2011

l

Technical Communication

29

Applied Research

Light’s “Technical Writing and Professional Status”
practitioners had newly emerged in the postwar
industrial boom. The number of professional technical
writers was on a steep ascent, as suggested by the 30%
increase in STWP membership from 1960 to 1965
(Kynell, 2000, p. 106). In one of his later essays, Light
(1967) pointed to the rapid change seen in practitioner
roles, which had broadened widely as compared with
a mere decade before. These changes inspired many
poorly planned efforts at professionalization, symptoms
of what Light (1967) described as “profession-itis”
(p. 57). Professional status was a frequent topic of
discussion within STWP, both at chapter meetings
and in the Society’s publication, the STWP Review,
but also on a much broader cultural scale (Light,
1961). Highly regarded and best-selling books, such as
Vance Packard’s The Status Seekers (1959), pontificated
on the subject of status and position. Other fields
were also grappling with how to become full-fledged
professions. It was against this backdrop that Light
(1961) presented his perspective on the issue. His
purpose was to address the implications, definitions, and
relevancy of professionalism and ultimately to provide
recommendations on achieving the goals of status and
recognition.
It is likely that Light’s recommendations were
carefully and widely considered by his peers. He was
an accomplished and high-profile figure in the field.
He held five degrees, three of which were in education,
including a doctoral degree (“Israel Light,” 1967). His
career roles ranged from speech writer to radio lecturer
to technical editor, for organizations as diverse as the
United Nations, the U.S. Public Health Service, and
the National Institute of Mental Health (“Israel Light,”
1967). He was widely published. In July 1964, he was
made fellow of STWP because of his “outstanding
work as a technical writer, consultant, and speaker and
his unceasing dedication to the profession of technical
communication” (“Grade,” 1964, p. 22). In 1971,
he was appointed fellow of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science and the Institute of
Medicine of Chicago (“Members,” 1971). Shortly
thereafter, the Chicago Medical School/University
of Health Sciences hired him as dean of its School of
Related Health Sciences (“Appointments,” 1969). He
was a member of the Education Committee of the
American Medical Writer’s Association, and through
that group developed technical communication courses
30

Technical Communication

l

Volume 59, Number 1, February 2012

for the School of Related Health Sciences in 1973
(“AMWA education,” 1973). Just two years later, he died
at age 59 (“Recent deaths,” 1975). Though his tenure
at the university was short, his influence was such that
the university, now Rosalind Franklin University, offers
the Israel Light Award each year to a student displaying
exceptional leadership qualities. One of the listed criteria
is involvement in a professional organization (Student
handbook, 2007).
Light (1961) proposes three broad components to
training as a technical communicator. One encompasses
writing skills and technical writing genres. He places
greater emphasis, though, on a second component: the
addition of a strong scientific background that could
enable contextualization and higher quality output.
He recommends that at least half of the training
should be in scientific and technical coursework. His
third component is exposure to methods of document
design and of working with graphics and audiovisual
material. The list is in some respects forward thinking.
For instance, although he states that instruction in
document production was “possibly not essential,”
its inclusion bespeaks a broad understanding of the
field at the time. He does not venture into greater
specificity; instead, he advises that a survey of technical
communication roles in industry be performed to
identify clearly what competencies should be taught.
Whether viewed as a historical reference point to
the current professionalization conversation or simply as
an added voice to that discussion, 50 years later, Light’s
perspectives on technical communication’s professional
status remain compelling:
The search of the technical writer for professional
standing and status has been examined from a
number of points of view. The psychological,
historical, and economic reasons for this striving
have been noted and justified. It appears that
“profession” and “professional person” are illdefined. Even as variously stated, the current
descriptions and definitions of “profession” seem
increasingly outdated and meaningless. At the same
time, the technical writer himself requires more
specific delineation. The one major characteristic
of the professional person to which technical
writers can profitably address themselves is that
of specialized, academic education and training.

Applied Research
Hallier and Malone

The important elements of such training must be
more clearly identified, the particular skills defined,
and institutions encouraged to provide the basic
competencies agreed upon (Light, 1961, p. 9).
The edited version of Light’s original article can
be found on the Technical Communcation Web site
(E13-E21).

References
AMWA education committee aids communication
courses at Chicago Medical School. (1973). AMWA
Newsletter, 4(5), 1. Retrieved from http://www.
amwa.org/default/history/newsletters/sept73.pdf
Appointments. (1969). Science, New Series, 164(3886),
1382.
Grade of fellow granted to two members. (1964). STWP
Review, 11(3), 22.
Israel Light. (1967). In B. K. McKee (Ed.), Proceedings
of the 1967 Institute in Technical and Industrial
Communications (pp. 134-135). Fort Collins, CO:
Colorado State University.
Kynell, T. (2000). Writing in a milieu of utility: The move
to technical communication in American engineering
programs, 1850–1950 (2nd ed.). Stamford, CT:
Ablex Publishing Corporation.
Light, I. (1961). Technical writing and professional
status. Journal of Chemical Documentation, 1(30),
4–9.
Light, I. (1967). Collaboratively planning the formal
training of technical communication specialists.
Journal of Business Communication, 4(2), 53–67.
Members in the news. (1971). AMWA Newsletter, 2(1),
4. Retrieved from http://www.amwa.org/default/
history/newsletters/march71.pdf
Packard, V. (1959). The status seekers: An exploration of
class behavior in America and the hidden barriers that
affect you, your community, your future. New York,
NY: David McKay Company.
Recent deaths. (1975). Science: New Series, 188(4191),
919.
Savage, G. (2003). Introduction: Toward professional
status in technical communication. In T. KynellHunt & G. Savage (Eds.). Power and legitimacy
in technical communication: Vol. I. The historical

and contemporary struggle for professional status (pp.
1–12). Amityville, NY: Baywood.
Student handbook: College of health professions. (2007).
Retrieved from http://www.rosalindfranklin.
edu/DNN/Portals/25/documents/Biomed/
CHPStudent Handbook.pdf

About the Authors
Patricia A. Hallier is majoring in chemical engineering
and technical communication at Missouri University
of Science and Technology (Missouri S&T). Contact:
Patricia.Hallier@mst.edu.
Edward A. Malone is an associate professor and
director of the online graduate program in technical
communication at Missouri S&T. Contact: malonee@
mst.edu.
Manuscript received 20 February 2011, revised 11 April 2011,
accepted 8 August 2011.

Volume 59, Number 1, February 2012

l

Technical Communication

31

