J. TECHNICAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATION, Vol. 42(2) 143-158, 2012

CHALLENGES AND REWARDS OF TEACHING

INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION IN A

TECHNICAL WRITING COURSE: A CASE STUDY

DIANA L. CÁRDENAS
Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi

ABSTRACT

Community-based projects immerse technical writing students in inter-
cultural communication, addressing local needs and shaping documents
in human terms. Students at a South Texas university work to establish
communication with clients in a city-county health department to create
effective documents and disseminate family health legislation. To prepare
students for interactions in multicultural settings, the teacher provides an
instructional framework that highlights the concepts and values of inter-
cultural communication and the principles for effective problem-solving.
Students engaged in the Baby Moses (el niño Moisés) project encounter
misunderstandings, rhetorical challenges within the process of document
creation, and cultural tensions that thwart their goal to disseminate infor-
mation to the community. Students and the teacher learn that the classroom,
like the city-county health department, is a fertile site for cultural dis-
equilibrium, tensions, and potential cultural awareness. To insure a viable
Technical and Professional Writing Program in a culturally diverse university
and surrounding community, the teacher identifies opportunities that help
students develop and enhance their identities as culturally-sensitive com-
municators and effective problem solvers.

I don’t want to offend any girl or woman. I want to do this with sensitivity
(Eileen, a student engaged in publicizing the Baby Moses Law).

Born Oct. 4, 2009 at 2:30 a.m. Please help me. My mother cannot care for me
and is very sorry to leave me here (Message attached to an abandoned baby).

143

Ó 2012, Baywood Publishing Co., Inc.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2190/TW.42.2.d
http://baywood.com

144 / CÁRDENAS

INTRODUCTION

In the 10 years since the Texas legislature passed the Safe Haven Law (1999),
known as the Baby Moses law—la ley el niño Moisés—no organization in
Nueces County, in South Texas, has conducted an organized public campaign to
enlighten residents about the legislation and its guidelines. Many residents are
not aware of how the law works, particularly how it offers anonymity and
immunity from prosecution to new mothers who leave babies in specified safe
havens—hospitals and fire stations—within 60 days of their births. Thus, infants
are abandoned in remote locations, or they are left to perish in dumpsters. For
the faculty in the Technical and Professional Writing Program at a regional
university, networking with representatives of the area’s children’s hospital,
the food bank, and the Catholic Diocese—which serve diverse populations—
has called attention to the need for effective intercultural communication to
promote initiatives that help families. This article presents a case study, detailing
the experiences of technical writing students and their teacher in an examination
of the city-county health department as an appropriate context to study the
Baby Moses law and collaborate with the department’s staff and clients to effec-
tively disseminate information about it. It defines intercultural communication,
describes how intercultural communication is taught, and examines factors within
intercultural communication—values, rhetorical decisions, and cultural conflict—
that lead to the disheartening failure of the project. Finally, it presents the
responsibilities of the teacher to help students deal with challenges and to develop
cultural awareness, promote meaningful intercultural communication within the
community, and insure a viable Technical and Professional Writing Program.

BUILDING A THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK FOR

INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION

In their work “Intercultural Communication and the New American Campus,”
Bennett and Salonen of the Intercultural Communication Institute, which offers
professional development to foster awareness and appreciation of cultural dif-
ference, caution that intercultural competence means more than simply being
“in the vicinity of cultural events” [1, p. 50]. Therefore, before students identify
and embrace a community project, they build a theoretical framework to guide
their efforts. Two works are necessary to define intercultural communication. In
Intercultural Competence: Interpersonal Communication across Cultures, Lustig
and Koester explain that intercultural communication is a symbolic, interpre-
tive, transactional, contextual process in which the degree of difference between
people is large and significant enough to create “dissimilar interpretations and
expectations about how to communicate competently” [2, p. 51]. Differences
exist in their “value orientations, preferred communication codes, role expecta-
tions, and perceived rules of social relationships” [2, p. 52]. The authors note that

TEACHING INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION / 145

communication exists within a continuum of interculturalness, from most to
least intercultural.

In Communication between Cultures Samovar, Porter, and McDaniel state
that intercultural communication occurs when a member of one culture
produces a message for consumption by a member of another culture. More
precisely, intercultural communication involves interaction between people
whose cultural perceptions and symbol systems are distinct enough to alter
the communication event [3, pp. 9-10].

Important in their definition is the concept of a “co-culture.” They explain,
“Co-cultures share many of the patterns and perceptions found within the larger,
dominant culture, but they also have distinct and unique patterns of communi-
cation that they have learned as part of their membership in the co-culture”
[3, p. 11]. A communicator must be aware of three challenges in interacting
with members of a co-culture: lacking objectivity, creating stereotypes, and
disregarding the uniqueness of each individual. For example, a communicator
cannot ascribe or assign his/her personal and cultural meaning to a communication
event; he/she should understand generalizations or stereotypes as approximations;
and a communicator must recognize that an individual is more than his/her culture.

Intercultural Engagement and Technical Communication

Researchers who study the need for effective technical communication in
culturally-diverse international settings offer important insight into intercultural
communication. In Ethical and Intercultural Challenges for Technical Com-
municators and Managers in a Shrinking Global Marketplace, Voss and Flammia
describe the ethical challenge to technical communicators of avoiding ethno-
centrism, the belief that one’s culture is superior to the culture of other groups
[4]. They identify five essential values necessary to promote effective intercul-
tural communication and ethical technical communication in problem-solving:
cultural sensitivity,
responsibility.
Focusing on cultural sensitivity, they explain that two approaches to cultural
competence influence technical communicators:

teamwork, and social

legality, privacy,

1. The universalist approach contends that absolute standards cross cultures;
that is, certain standards transcend all differences. For example, everyone
should be sensitive to the suffering of others. Within this maxim lies the
technical communicator’s emphasis on social responsibility.

2. The relativist approach, in contrast, views what is ethical or unethical only
in a specific context. As an illustration, privacy is defined by very distinct
manifestations in different cultural settings.

According to Voss and Flammia, “Scholars who address the issue of intercultural
ethics, as well as technical communicators who write for an intercultural and

146 / CÁRDENAS

multinational audience, must strive to reconcile [the tensions between] the two
approaches” [4, p. 74].

In his work on the central virtues of Confucian ethics, Dragga sheds light on
the relativist approach [5]. Focused on ethical intercultural technical communi-
cation in the creation of text and the rhetorical decisions of a writer or writers,
he explains the need for technical communicators to understand the ideals that
govern communication behaviors. Using an example of an American breakfast
product being marketed to the Chinese people, he shows the importance of
technical writers incorporating specific cultural virtues—goodness, righteous-
ness, wisdom, faithfulness, reverence, and courage—to demonstrate, to the target
audience, reliability, trustworthiness, and respect for cultural difference [5,
pp. 367-378].

Another facet of respect and sensitivity toward cultural difference is tolerance;
it involves recognizing ethnocentrism that creates stereotyping—categorizing
an individual or culture through a superficial look at how an individual differs
from another or how a culture differs from another culture—and tokenism—the
appearance of equal treatment. To avoid ethnocentrism, technical communicators
must understand that culture is dynamic and fluid, and, therefore, they must
discover as much information as possible about a specific context: attitudes,
values, practices, verbal styles, hierarchies, the purpose of information products,
and the characteristics of the users. This act of discovery has relevance for
technical communicators who create documents for international settings or
for the technical communication students working in multicultural contexts,
such as the city-county health department.

Teaching Intercultural Communication

The work of researchers in the teaching of intercultural communication is
valuable for teachers as they prepare students for community-based endeavors.
Bennet and Salonen argue that most often culture “is addressed in the content
of the curriculum [and] less frequently incorporated into the process of teaching
and learning” [1, p. 46]. Teachers must promote student experiences that allow
students “to construe events [and experiences] and then re-construe them in
transformative ways” [1, p. 46].

Thus, meaningful reconstruction begins with students seeing themselves as part
of an intercultural setting. Chamberlin-Quinlisk, coordinator for the Center of Inter-
cultural Leadership and Communication at Penn State Abington College, reports
on her study of linguistically different students involved in a mentoring partner-
ship [6]. She found that active engagement offered access and opportunity for
intercultural communication. It brought the students’ assumptions and beliefs
into question and moved them to a revision of their assumptions. She examined
their revision process in light of the transformative learning theory espoused
by adult learning researcher Mezirow, who noted, transformative learning

TEACHING INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION / 147

refers to the process by which we transform our taken-for-granted frames
of reference (meaning perspectives, habits of mind, mind-sets) to make them
more inclusive, discriminating, open, emotionally capable of change, and
reflective so that they may generate beliefs and opinions that will prove
more true or justified to guide action [quoted in 6, p. 471].

Within the process of mentoring, students experienced “disorientation, followed
by reflection, exploration of assumptions, behavioral changes, gains in confi-
dence, competence in new roles, and integration of new perspectives” [6, p. 471].
Also, Chamberlin-Quinlisk identified a similar finding in the intercultural
competency research of Taylor, who adapted Mezirow’s theory. In Taylor’s
analysis of interviews with individuals who spent time living and working in
foreign cultures, he found a “readiness for learning, cultural disequilibrium,
reflective and non-reflective cognitive orientations, new behavioral strategies,
and changes in perspective that promote an evolving intercultural identity”
[quoted in 6, p. 472].

Further, researchers have studied obstacles to teaching intercultural com-

munication. DeVoss, Jasken, and Hayden identify five challenges [7]:

1. moving students beyond the characteristics of their own cultures;
2. replacing notions of cultural stereotypes (positive and negative) with fluid,

dynamic understandings of tendencies;

3. limiting the guidelines for good intercultural communication to guidelines

for good technical communication in general;

4. developing a more sophisticated sense of the design considerations neces-

sary for intercultural communication; and

5. encouraging students to move intercultural communication beyond the

classroom [7, p. 76].

They also present modules to help teachers address some of these five
challenges. These modules include discussion-based classroom activities that
make use of students’ experiences. I have adapted these activities to stress
what I want to occur in class. One activity that addresses the second challenge
is designed to replace notions of cultural stereotypes with the concept of
tendencies. The activity allows students to work individually and then in
groups to create a list of stereotypes associated with groups of which students are
members, for instance, a surfing club or a sorority, and then to answer the
following questions:

(cid:129) Where do you think these stereotypes come from? Which are blatantly

wrong? Which have some truth in certain instances (tendency)?

(cid:129) Can you differentiate between stereotypes and tendencies of a group?
(cid:129) How might an understanding of these tendencies help others communicate

with the group?

148 / CÁRDENAS

(cid:129) What examples can you cite of individuals who do not possess the general

tendencies of the group?

(cid:129) How might seeing the group’s stereotypes as tendencies help us approach

situations in effective ways?

MOVING INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION

BEYOND THE CLASSROOM:

ADDRESSING THE BABY MOSES LAW

Recognizing the potential of the Baby Moses law to assist families in our
county, I invited my students to embrace the effort to educate area residents about
the law. I urged them “to turn an abstract piece of legislation into significant
human activity.” Eileen (a pseudonym), a student majoring in communication,
embraced the effort. A senior who was already accepted into the Peace Corps,
she was eager to apply her academic study of effective communication to address
an actual need in our community.

In our community, with about 321,000 residents, 59% of the residents are
Hispanic, 35.6% are White, 4.1% are African American, and 1.3 are Asian [8].
Public records—birth rates, income statistics, school information—reveal that
the county has a high poverty level, a large school dropout rate, and one of
the highest rates of unwed mothers and teenage pregnancies in the state [9].
State health department statistics for 2005 show that in South Texas teen preg-
nancy is a major concern; the repeat pregnancy rate for teen mothers, 15-17
years old, is 14% [10, p. A6].

The City-County Health Department

Because the Baby Moses Law intends to help new born babies and new
mothers, I decided that the city-county health department would be the most
appropriate context in which to ground the project. The city-county health depart-
ment, centrally located within the neighborhoods where there is much need,
provides healthcare and assistance for large numbers of families. According to
the director of the Women, Infant, and Children’s Program (WIC), which provides
nutrition to low-income pregnant, breastfeeding, and post-partum women and
children under five years of age, an average of 5,884 clients per month received
benefits in fiscal year 2010 [11].

Eileen and I scheduled an appointment with the health department’s director.
Well aware of the law and the lack of information reaching residents, the
director, a female physician, offered her assistance and the assistance of her staff
to shape an organized, local campaign to educate area residents. According to the
director, the majority of the clients are Hispanic. Some clients do not speak
English. Adolescent girls and young women, immigrants and native citizens, seek
assistance. The coordinator of the parenting curriculum reports that for many of

TEACHING INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION / 149

the girls and young women, the health department is the only source of pre-
and neonatal care.

Enthusiastic about the support of the department’s director for the project,
Eileen and I drove back to the university, ready to announce the good news to the
class. Having studied intercultural communication and public relations, Eileen
recognized the delicate nature of the effort, telling classmates, “I don’t want to
offend any girl or woman. I want to do this with sensitivity.” Eileen explained
that she had one year of college Spanish, but she did not feel confident about
her skills. She noted that although her parents are fluent in English and Spanish,
they spoke only English with her and her brother to shield them from possible
prejudice and discrimination. The parents believed that being fluent in Spanish
would make Eileen and her brother different from their school peers. Because
of Eileen’s concern about her lack of fluency, I asked three of her classmates
to provide assistance as Eileen worked on the project. Two of the students,
female Criminal Justice majors, were fluent in Spanish. A male student, a History
major, did not speak Spanish; all three students expressed an interest in studying
the legislation.

One of the female students offered personal information about her interaction
with the staff of the city-county health department. Having grown up near the
health department and recognizing the department’s long history and valuable
public mission, I also shared my thoughts with the students. After this discus-
sion, Eileen proposed that clients at the health department, girls and women,
would be ideal participants in a study of the Baby Moses law, the creation of
public documents, and the dissemination of the information. Because I cham-
pioned the goal of the law, I agreed that clients could help transform the law
into meaningful, local knowledge.

The strategy of engaging clients in public issues has been studied by Grabill
who understands the need to engage stakeholders in shaping public health
policy that directly affects them [12]. In the description of his work (read by
my students) in an Atlanta agency, he describes barriers that prevent client
involvement and the urgency of effecting meaningful involvement by developing,
with clients, procedures to overcome these barriers. For Grabill the problem of
client involvement is “. . . a communications problem, and closely related to this,
a problem (perhaps) with the way in which ‘involvement’ is currently defined and
practiced” [12, p. 39]. Involvement must reflect clients’ perspectives and actual
needs. In a recent work Simmons and Grabill call attention to the growing
challenges to citizens, non-experts in civic spaces where deliberation is essen-
tial in decision making that affects communities [13]. For public participation
citizens must be able “to invent valued knowledge” and produce performances
that “. . . have epistemological value: meeting notes and agendas, flyers and
newsletters, websites and iMovies, meetings and protests, letters and reports”
[13, p. 422]. They note that the role of the researcher in guiding and developing
the skills of clients is critical.

150 / CÁRDENAS

Confident that we had the support of the director and staff at the city-county
health department and hopeful that the female clients would recognize the impor-
tance of educating the community, Eileen and I agreed that the clients, in focus
groups, would help make decisions within planning, drafting, revising, and dis-
seminating activities to insure cultural sensitivity.

Effective collaborative work requires an understanding of the dynamics in
an intercultural context. One of the elements to effect cultural sensitivity to be able
to accomplish a task, identified by Arya, Margaryan, and Collis, is egalitarianism,
evidenced by a leveling of status to support team work [14, p. 42].Working as
equals toward a common goal, members engaged in problem solving efforts
will realize that their contributions are important and valued. Presenting a related
concept, Cushman highlights the need to develop a literacy that may lead to an
alteration in the status quo [15]. She underscores the reciprocity and interdepen-
dency that accompany constructing knowledge collaboratively [15]. To promote
the idea of reciprocity, I favored the idea of female clients serving as agents for
meaningful study of the legislation. With the clients Eileen would discover
information about the possible users of the information—not only girls and
women but family members, cousins, aunts, boyfriends, and husbands. With the
clients she would shape questions for a survey, collect data, and write texts for
fliers and brochures. Further, she and the clients would make decisions about
how and where to disseminate information with the goal of calling attention to
the specific elements of the Baby Moses legislation.

Client Identity and Social Action

In her discussion of social activism, Cushman argues that social change does
not have to be defined in terms of large “social upheavals.” Social action can
result from what the sociologist Giddens identifies as a deroutinization, “an
impeding of routine patterns of behavior that re-enact the social structures that
underpin that behavior” [15, p. 12]. Impeding or an alteration in patterns of
behavior can occur through changes in language and literacy—for example, how
a person speaks, in which situations, to whom, about what, how well, to what
end, how that speech is assessed, and by whom. Social action is discursively
constructed; therefore, individuals may be able to develop new attitudes, values,
perspectives, and patterns of behaviors, and they may experience a change in
how they see themselves—prompted by a deroutinization.

Communication researchers, Abrams, O’Connor, and Giles (2003), note that
“identities emerge when messages are exchanged between persons” [16, p. 210].
They refer to two concepts developed by intercultural communication scholar
and teacher, Collier: identity enacted through avowal and identity created by
ascription. According to Collier, avowal is the “self [that] an individual portrays
(‘This is who I am.’). Ascription is the process by which others attribute identities
to an individual” [quoted in 16, pp. 210-211]. These two concepts can be seen in an

TEACHING INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION / 151

account, provided by Rice of female adolescents—pregnant girls or mothers of
small children—in the school-sponsored Second Chance Club in Charleston,
South Carolina; the adolescents embrace the task of creating brochures to help
other girls understand myths of sex and conception [17]. By making decisions
regarding what subject matter should be transmitted, the essential information to
be presented, what they want the audience to gain from it, in what form to publish
it, and where to distribute documents, the adolescent girls enhanced their sense
of who they are. The positive public response to their brochures at the high
school clinic, the health department, and clinics in the Charleston area also
altered how others defined the adolescents and responded to them [17]. For these
adolescent girls the new agency and perceptions constitute a deroutinization, a
form of social action.

I believed that the process of soliciting and valuing the talk of clients in the
focus groups at the city-county health department and engaging them in decision
making and document creation would certainly nurture agency and precipitate
an alteration in identity. By interpreting the Baby Moses legislation, “owning
it,” and creating ways to communicate it to safeguard the health of babies and
mothers, the focus group members might begin to identify themselves as doers,
not just recipients of the help of others.

PROPOSING CLIENT INVOLVEMENT:
THE CHALLENGES OF CREATING A

CULTURALLY-SENSITIVE PROJECT PROPOSAL

To comply with the university’s policies regarding research, Eileen and I
wrote a proposal for the Institutional Review Board (IRB) Committee. We, as
well as the director of the city-county health department, signed the request for
permission to use female clients as subjects. We felt that the director’s support
of the project and her eagerness to make the public aware of the Baby Moses
law validated the need and worthiness of the project. Also, the health depart-
ment’s director had collaborated on projects with faculty members in other
departments. I submitted the request to the chairperson of the IRB Committee,
and we waited for approval.

Weeks passed, and we did not receive a response. When I saw the chairperson
of the IRB committee, I asked if the committee had granted permission. She
explained that the committee members had rejected the research proposal because
“the student would be influencing the girls at the health department at a vulner-
able time. It’s the issue of privacy and control.” The committee’s objections call
to mind some of key values, identified by Voss and Flammia in ethical problem
solving in intercultural communication, highlighted in our class readings: cultural
sensitivity, social responsibility, and privacy [4].

The students were upset by the decision of the IRB committee, and I was
surprised. I read and reflected on our written description of the project’s goals and

152 / CÁRDENAS

activities. I found two errors of omission. First, Eileen and I had not described
specific criteria for selecting clients for focus groups. I just assumed that no
pregnant clients would be selected to join a focus group; however, I did not
articulate this assumption to Eileen. Second, we did not submit a detailed script
of how we were going to describe, to the clients, the exact nature of their pur-
pose and specific activities. A written, detailed script would have assuaged any
concerns of the IRB committee members regarding the clients’ vulnerability. In
communicating this culturally-sensitive project to the IRB committee, Eileen and
I did not effectively promote the theoretical concepts studied and discussed in
class. Thus, we left the committee members to make guesses about the involve-
ment of the clients and their interactions with Eileen. We created concern and,
maybe, suspicion. This painful experience is a useful lesson for me and for all
teachers who value and promote the teaching of intercultural communication
and its application to address real human needs. We have to teach students how
to effectively convey an understanding of intercultural communication theory
and write a culturally-sensitive proposal for the IRB committees. (In spring 2010
a graduate student and I wrote a successful IRB proposal to survey patients at a
neighborhood diabetes clinic to assess their understanding of written materials and
physician instructions and their efforts to manage the illness. In the creation of
survey questions, we involved the clinic administrator and program coordinator.)

INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION AND CULTURAL

DISEQUILIBRIUM IN THE CLASSROOM

The rejection of the proposal was a disappointment to the students. Having to
move forward in some manner, Eileen chose to create various flyers and brochures
that could be placed in public libraries and neighborhood centers. In class, she
shared her first draft of a flyer with her three peers and me. The large title read
“Baby Moses” and the translation El Niño Moisés. A picture of a baby was situated
to the right of the title. Below the picture the first statement read, Si quiere dejar
a su bebé, lo puede dejar en un hospital, estación de bomberos, o lo puede dejar
con una persona en un sitio de cuidado de emergencia. The English translation
followed: “If you want to leave your baby, you can leave him or her at a hospital,
a fire station, or give the baby to an EMT person.” One of the female students
objected to this statement. She explained, “Don’t say that someone wants to
leave a baby. Hispanics believe that a baby is a gift from God. Parents and
grandparents help raise their kids’ children. Only bad circumstances force a girl
to leave a baby.” The other female student offered a revision: “You can change
it to ‘If you must leave your baby.’” Si tiene que dejar a su bebé. This interaction
among the students highlights the tensions between the universalist and the
relativist approach, described by Voss and Flammia [4].

The same student focused her attention on the next statement, “Do the right
thing.” She noted, “That’s like ‘Just Say No to Drugs.’ It ignores their problem.

TEACHING INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION / 153

Being a teenager and hiding a pregnancy is hard. You will turn them off.”
She added, “You want to create trust.” The student suggested the question,
“Do you want to help your baby?” ¿Quiere ayudar a su bebé?

The male student suggested that the picture of the White baby in the flyer should
be replaced with a baby who had “more pigment, who looks more Hispanic.”
However, the two female students objected, stating that the image might be seen
as saying that dark-skinned babies will be the only ones to be abandoned or that
girls or women of color are the only ones who abandon babies. They agreed that
a symbol, such as a giraffe or a teddy bear or both, should be used instead.
They understood the implications of the original depiction, and, certainly, they
would agree with Judith Tarutz, former senior technical editor at Hewlett-Packard,
who recommends “against using images that present the race and gender of the
subjects because they encourage certain stereotypes” [7, p. 85].

Because the effective teaching of intercultural communication is essential in
our community-based projects, it is important to analyze the interaction of the
group members as they examined, discussed, and reconstructed Eileen’s flyer.
First, the group revisions of the Baby Moses flyer call attention to teamwork,
one of the values, identified by Voss and Flammia, as necessary to promote
cultural sensitivity [4]. Second, the vocal and passionate responses of group
members contributed to cultural disequilibrium, one of the early stages in
the path to cultural competence noted by Taylor [6]. In the reflection that
accompanied the final report, Eileen acknowledged her disequilibrium and
the contribution of the group members: “They helped me understand what
I needed to do NOT to offend anyone.” Also, the other students experienced
cultural tensions.

This classroom learning experience brought

the students—and me—
face-to-face with the challenges to a communicator in problem solving within
intercultural communication. The group discussion of the flyer and the revision
process reveal that our classrooms are actual sites of cultural difference, potential
tensions, and possible alterations in perspectives. Within the dynamics of inter-
cultural communication, students behaved in transformative ways, a process
that Bennett and Salonen identify as necessary for intercultural competence [1].

INSURING SUCCESSFUL STUDENT INTERCULTURAL

ENGAGEMENTS: THE TEACHER’S ROLE

Wiseman writes that intercultural communication competence “involves the
knowledge, motivation, and skills to interact effectively and appropriately with
members of different cultures” [18, p. 192]. Meaningful community-based
projects can help students develop these gains and initiate alterations in students’
cultural perceptions. In the Technical and Professional Writing Program, faculty
members have made a public commitment to provide opportunities for students
to use their backgrounds and abilities in problem solving to address the needs of

154 / CÁRDENAS

underserved populations. According to Cushman, success for all the stakeholders
requires that teachers build a “consistent, flexibly structured, and rewarding
program” [19, p. 41]. Efforts must involve a generative, collaborative relationship
with the community that promotes “reciprocity in various forms: in recognizing
the history and contributions of . . . institutions, in commitment to a relationship
not defined by a one-semester project, and in a respect for community expertise
that is expressed in the active practice of dialogue” [19, p. 43]. Thus, in my
program that means that faculty members must understand the needs and strengths
of the organizations, interact with their leaders and decision-makers, and study
the theoretical framework of intercultural communication with their students
to help them become effective rhetoricians and communicators.

Further, since 2000, faculty members have formed long-term partnerships
with several organizations: the Boys and Girls’ Club, the YWCA, the Gonzales
Recreation and Education Center, the Juvenile Justice Center, and the Hispanic
Chamber of Commerce. As an example, since its inception several years ago,
when the director of the newly constructed Gonzales Center outlined the center’s
initial goal to develop the potential of the neighborhood children, teachers in
our program have facilitated student construction of a website to attract donors
and volunteers for the center’s programs and events, authored the employee
policy manual and the pool safety manual, and planned a summer basketball camp
for the youngsters. In reciprocity, the center’s director and program coordinators
have assisted our students with projects. Also, they have provided internships
for our students. Further, community contexts and the student problem solving
endeavors have served as research sites for teachers—for example, this account
of intercultural communication in the city-county health department—to enhance
teaching and scholarship.

Identifying Opportunities for Intercultural
Communication

In this culturally-diverse university and surrounding community, a rewarding
program for all participants must take account of opportunities for intercultural
communication. To identify opportunities for engaging students, the teacher
may adopt the following practices:

(cid:129) communicate with directors of organizations that serve diverse populations;
(cid:129) attend activities that promote bilingual and multicultural perspectives;
(cid:129) network within the community to find translators;
(cid:129) interact with faculty members in other departments who deal with social

issues among diverse groups (nursing, sociology); and

(cid:129) participate in committees that promote intercultural and international com-

munication (such as our port with its international trade initiatives).

TEACHING INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION / 155

Helping Students Succeed in Intercultural Contexts

The experiences of the student group studying the Baby Moses law raises

questions that technical communication teachers must consider:

1. How do we help students effectively address needs within multicultural

contexts in our community?

2. How are we helping students experience increased intercultural awareness

as they address those needs?

3. What means do we put in place to help students express this awareness

to benefit everyone in class?

4. How do we help our students cope with challenges that arise within

intercultural/intercultural contexts?

Before instruction begins, tasks involved in intercultural communication should
not be represented as problems but instead identified as opportunities to engage
with audiences/clients in creative and reflective ways. Also, the teacher must
construct a mechanism to help students understand the dynamics within contexts
and to promote meaningful experiences. The mechanism includes:

(cid:129) presentations of agency mission, programs, and goals by agency directors;
(cid:129) on site class visits at agencies and centers;
(cid:129) creation of cross-cultural student teams to present concepts studied in class

and help direct class discussions of assigned articles;

(cid:129) creation of an online help site for students to post comments and ask peers

for assistance;

(cid:129) class sharing of experiences as students engage program directors and clients;
(cid:129) observation memorandums to teacher; and
(cid:129) progress reports to teacher.

CONCLUSION

Chamberlin-Quinlisk notes that our students bring with them a wide range of
cultural backgrounds that can promote intercultural learning experiences and
that our local communities serve as settings for these experiences [6]. We can
encourage students to embrace and value the roles and identities of researcher,
problem solver, neighbor, advocate, and world citizen. This realization, note
Bennett and Salonen, “is fostered through developmental opportunities, grounded
in theory and facilitated experiences” [1, p. 50]. The intent of the Technical
Writing classes is to engage students in political, economic, and healthcare arenas
that are tied to actual people with pressing needs and to daily issues of gender,
class, power, equity, and culture. My students’ classroom study of intercultural
communication and their efforts to communicate the Baby Moses legislation to
the county’s population represent one of these developmental opportunities.

156 / CÁRDENAS

In our area, law enforcement offices are not required to “keep count” of
abandonment cases, and there is no total number of babies left by parents since
the law was passed. Television stations and the local newspaper report on cases
of child abandonment. In October 2009, a newborn baby was abandoned in
front of a medical office. A handwritten note left with the baby explained the
circumstances of the abandonment: “Born Oct. 4, 2009, at 2:30 a.m. Please help
me. My mother cannot care for me and is very sorry to leave me here” [20, p. B2].
In September 2010, a newborn was abandoned in front of a laundromat [21, p. B1].
Law enforcement officials rarely find the mothers of these infants. However,
nearby in Bee County, a 25-year-old woman was prosecuted and sent to prison
for 20 years for placing her newborn baby in a trash bin. The baby died [22].
These incidents highlight the need to educate area residents about the Baby
Moses law. Therefore, to my spring classes I intend to present this issue and
invite students to undertake a study of the law and to create a public campaign to
respond to this need. In addition to class discussions of assigned readings in
intercultural communication, the proposal for the IRB committee members will
be drafted and revised collaboratively in class.

I was unsuccessful in contacting Eileen to invite her to share her Peace
Corps experiences with me. From her, I had hoped to gain ideas of how to
further prepare students for intercultural communication. However, during fall
2010 final examinations, a graduate of our English program who serves in the
Peace Corps visited our department and shared with us connections that she saw
between her studies in our program and the experiences in her service in Praia,
Santiago, the capital city of Cape Verde, a chain of islands off Africa. According
to Misty Lassiter, the classroom readings and discussions and interactions with
peers and faculty facilitated an understanding of uses of language, discourse
conventions, identity shaped by language and culture, and the need for cultural
sensitivity. Our program served as a base for the 9-week Peace Corps cultural
awareness training given before she undertook her teaching assignment at the
Universidade de Cabo Verde. To my question, “What did you learn about adapting
to a different culture to be able to live harmoniously with your host family?”
she responded, “I learned not to question the customs and interactions of my
host family members, particularly the lack of authority of my host mother”
[23]. Teaching intercultural communication, with its challenges and rewards, is
necessary in the process of preparing students to live in, work at, and contribute to
a multicultural society, whether it is across continents or across town.

REFERENCES

1. J. Bennet and R. M. Salonen, Intercultural Communication and the New American

Campus, Change, March/April, pp. 46-50, 2007.

2. M. Lustig and J. Koester, Intercultural Competence: Interpersonal Communication

across Cultures, Allyn & Bacon, Boston, Massachusetts, pp. 50-52, 2003.

TEACHING INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION / 157

3. L. A. Samovar, R. E. Porter, and E. R. McDaniel, Communication between Cultures,

Thomson/Wadsworth, Belmont, California, pp. 9-10, 2007.

4. D. Voss and M. Flammia, Ethical and Intercultural Challenges for Technical Com-
municators and Managers in a Shrinking Global Marketplace, Technical Communi-
cation, 54:1, pp. 72-87, 2007.

5. S. Dragga, Ethical Intercultural Communication: Looking Through the Lens of

Confucian Ethics, Technical Communication Quarterly, 8:4, pp. 365-381, 1999.

6. C. R. Chamberlin-Quinlisk, Across Continents or Across the Street: Using Local
Resources to Cultivate Intercultural Awareness, Intercultural Education, 16:5,
pp. 469-479, 2005.

7. D. De Voss, J. Jasken, and D. Hayden, Teaching Intracultural and Intercultural
Communication: A Critique and Suggested Method, Journal of Business and
Communication, 16:1, pp. 69-94, 2002.

8. U.S. Census Bureau, 2006-2008 American Community Survey, Nueces County,
Texas, 2009, doi. http://factfinder.census.gov/home/saff/main.html?_lang=en(2009).
9. Youth Opportunities United Comprehensive Strategy Planning Tools, Texas
A&M University–Corpus Christi Social Science Center, Corpus Christi, Texas,
2004.

10. Teen Pregnancy Funding is More Critical than Ever, Corpus Christi Caller-Times,

p. A6, September 8, 2009.

11. Director, Women,

Infant, and Children’s Program, personal communication,

December 2010.

12. J. T. Grabill, Shaping Local HIV/AIDS Services Policy through Activist Research,

Technical Communication Quarterly, 9:1, pp. 29-50, 2000.

13. W. M. Simmons and J. T. Grabill, Toward a Civic Rhetoric for Technologically
Invention, Performance, and Participation,

and Scientifically Complex Places:
College Composition and Communication, 58:3, pp. 419-448, 2007.

14. K. Arya, A. Margaryan, and B. Collis, Culturally Sensitive Problem Solving for

Multi-National Corporations, Tech Trends, 47:6, pp. 40-49, 2003.

15. E. Cushman, The Rhetorician as Agent of Social Change, College Composition and

Communication, 47:1, pp. 7-27, 1996.

16. J. Abrams, J. O’Connor, and H. Giles, Identity and Intergroup Communication,
in Cross-Cultural and Intercultural Communication, W. B. Gudykunst (ed.), Sage,
Thousand Oaks, California, pp. 209-241, 2003.

17. E. C. Rice, Writing a Future: African American Teen Mothers Finding an Identity
in Charleston, South Carolina, in Writing to Make a Difference: Classroom Projects
for Community Change, C. Benson, S. Christian, D. Goswami, and W. H. Gooch
(eds.), Teachers College Press, New York, pp. 183-193, 2002.

18. R. L. Wiseman, Intercultural Competence, in Cross-Cultural and Intercultural Com-
munication, W. B. Gudykunst (ed.), Sage, Thousand Oaks, California, pp. 191-208,
2003.

19. E. Cushman, Sustainable Service Learning Programs, College Composition and Com-

munication, 54:1, pp. 40-46, 2002.

20. S. McFarland, Abandoned Baby Had Note Asking for Help, Corpus Christi Caller-

Times, p. B2, October 7, 2009.

21. J. Savage, Staff Names Abandoned Boy Jacob Michael, Corpus Christi Caller-Times,

p. B1, September 2, 2010.

158 / CÁRDENAS

22. Sheriff C. Carrizales, personal communication, July 2010.
23. Misty Lassiter, personal communication, January 2011.

Other Articles On Communication By This Author

Cárdenas, D. L., Assessing Writing in a Physical Therapy Unit, Academic Exchange

Quarterly, 9:1, pp. 36-40, 2005.

Cárdenas, D. L. and S. Loudermilk Garza, Refiguring the End of Teaching: Capacity for

Action, Technical Communication Quarterly, 11:2, pp. 219-222, 2002.

Cárdenas, D. L. and S. Loudermilk Garza, Rethinking the Boundaries of the Classroom:
Building a Program Around Civic Engagement, in Quick Hits for Educating Citizens,
J. L. Perry and S. G. Jones (eds.), Indiana University Press, Bloomington, Indiana,
pp. 89-90, 2006.

Cárdenas, D. L. and S. Loudermilk Garza, Restructuring Student and Teacher Roles:
Dealing with Struggle, Journal of Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 7:1,
pp. 34-44, 2007.

Cárdenas, D. L. and S. Loudermilk Garza, Building on the Richness of a South Texas
Community: Revisioning a Technical and Professional Writing Program through
Service Learning, in Teaching Writing with Latino/a Students: Lessons Learned at
Hispanic Serving Institutions, C. Kirklighter, D. Cárdenas, and S. W. Murphy (eds.),
State University of New York Press, Albany, New York, pp. 135-144, 2007.

Direct reprint requests to:

Diana L. Cárdenas
Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi
English Department Unit 5813
6300 Ocean Dr.
Corpus Christi, TX 78412
e-mail: Diana.cardenas@tamucc.edu


